Add a follow up on the inventory use case (#1760)
theforeman/theforeman.org: _posts/2021-01-12-updating-foreman-inventory-with-system-facts.md

---
layout: post
title: Updating Foreman inventory with system facts
date: 2021-01-12 17:00:00
author: Marek Hulan
tags:
- foreman
- community
- tutorial
- howto
- beginners
---

This is a continuation of [How to start with Foreman post](https://theforeman.org/2020/12/how-to-start-with-foreman.html).
Today we'll look at how the inventory can be kept up to date by receiving facts from hosts regularly. Then we'll take a look
where facts can be used. We'll illustrate the configuration on one config management system, but the same concept is applicable

> to other facts sources. Links to the related documentation will be provided.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to other facts sources. Links to the related documentation are provided.
```

<!--more-->

## Automatically update the inventory from configuration management

Having to keep a big inventory up to date manually would be a lot of work. Foreman
can receive updates from other tools used to manage the infrastructure and reflect

> them in the database. Also new Hosts can be created this way. If you use some

Reviewer 2: No need to capitalize `Hosts` here

> configuration management system or you use a subscription manager (mostly RPM

Reviewer 2: `a subscription manager` here is a bit odd since thats the client tools name in the case of `subscription-manager` and there aren't really others you could go use. I would opt for just saying `use subscription-manager`

> based distributions), you can configure it to forward data about managed hosts to Foreman. If the host does not exist in Foreman yet, it can be automatically created. If it exists, the record is updated accordingly.

Reviewer 2: Can or will be automatically created? Can you prevent automatic creation if the data is forwarded to Foreman?

Author: *can*, based on the settings described below, I updated the update sentece, so it's also *can*

Typically every configuration management agent run starts with gathering facts.
Facts are generic information about the machine, OS, networking and other areas.

> These facts can be uploaded to Foreman. They are parsed and processed, so that Foreman knows e.g.

Reviewer 2: s/knows e.g./knows, for example,/

about the current operating system version, kernel, IP addresses, available RAM etc.

> Foreman can also update other existing objects, such as associated subnet, OS or similar, if configured to do so. Also all the raw values

Reviewer 2: Could drop that latter `Also`, and just state `All the raw values are`

are stored for later use. We simply call them Facts.

> ## Facts importing overview

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Importing Facts overview
```

> The facts upload process is similar for all fact sources. The data is collected on the Smart Proxy machine and then sent to Foreman API. The request is authenticated using an x509 certificate. For the Authorization, the Foreman verifies, it comes from a Smart Proxy host, that have related Feature enabled (e.g. Puppet, Ansible etc). Then it imports the data and stores it to the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The facts upload process is similar for all fact sources. The data is collected on the Smart Proxy machine and then sent to the Foreman API. The request is authenticated using an x509 certificate. For the Authorization, Foreman verifies that it comes from a Smart Proxy host that have related Feature enabled (e.g. Puppet, Ansible etc). Then it imports the data and stores it in the database.
```

> The facts upload process is similar for all fact sources. The data is collected on the Smart Proxy machine and then sent to Foreman API. The request is authenticated using an x509 certificate. For the Authorization, the Foreman verifies, it comes from a Smart Proxy host, that have related Feature enabled (e.g. Puppet, Ansible etc). Then it imports the data and stores it to the database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The facts upload process is similar for all fact sources. The data is collected on the Smart Proxy machine and then sent to the Foreman API. The request is authenticated using an x509 certificate. For the authorization, the Foreman verifies the request comes from a Smart Proxy host that has related Feature enabled (e.g. Puppet, Ansible etc). Then Foreman imports the data and stores it to the database.
```

Reviewer 2: This paragraph implies that the Smart Proxy does the collecting (the reaching out and collecting). Perhaps clarify that it's the tooling or services (e.g. Ansible, puppet, etc.) that send the data to the smart proxy which collects and sends it.

Author: reformulated it a bit, so it's hopefully clearer

<p float='left' align='center'>
  <img src="/static/images/blog_images/2021-01-12-updating-foreman-inventory-with-system-facts/facts_upload_diagram.png" width="700" />
</p>

If the data contains a new fact, the new fact is created. If there’s a fact from a previous fact import, that’s no longer present in the new set, it’s deleted. Fact values are updated if they changed in the new data payload.

> Once facts are imported the parsing follows. We normalize them and update Host attributes. For example, Puppet reports uptime while subscription-manager reports boot time timestamp. At this point we calculate the boot time and store that in a unified form which can be easily used for searching in Foreman inventory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once facts are imported, the parsing follows. We normalize them and update Host attributes. For example, Puppet reports uptime while subscription-manager reports boot time timestamp. At this point we calculate the boot time and store that in a unified form which can be easily used for searching in Foreman inventory.
```

> Once facts are imported the parsing follows. We normalize them and update Host attributes. For example, Puppet reports uptime while subscription-manager reports boot time timestamp. At this point we calculate the boot time and store that in a unified form which can be easily used for searching in Foreman inventory.

Reviewer: Is "we" the sysadmin or Foreman? Like, I am confused here whether someone should be doing something or not.

Reviewer 2: Agree with @melcorr. There is a mixed use of 'We' (the audience or sys admin taking action) and 'We' (the Foreman) used in the post. I think it would help to ensure anything Foreman does is written as 'Foreman'.

Author: yeah, now when I read the sentence, it's clear it isn't clear :-) I've modified this to `Foreman` and will try to keep that in mind in next write ups

> We also update the host attributes, such as the operating system or even create a new OS object if it does not exist yet. As mentioned earlier, if we see facts for the host that does not exist in the Foreman database yet, Foreman can create it. This can be used to populate the inventory easily when you start with Foreman in the brownfield deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also update the host attributes, such as the operating system or even create a new OS object if it does not exist yet. As mentioned earlier, if we see facts for the host that does not exist in the Foreman database yet, Foreman can create it. This can be used to populate the inventory easily when you start with Foreman in a brownfield deployment.
```

    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Ignore interfaces with matching identifier</td>
      <td>Provisioning</td>
      <td>This is similar to excluded pattern settings above, it's only limited to parsing network interfaces facts. Parsing NICs is more performance heavy operation, therefore has its own configuration. But in general, it can be superceeded by the mentioned setting.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Ignore Puppet facts for provisioning</td>
      <td>Provisioning</td>
      <td>Completely ignore networking information importing from facts, this is useful when the detection does not correctly work in your environment, e.g. you use custom names for bonds or vlan interfaces.</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

### Configuring the Ansible callback

If you're an Ansible user, there is an easy way to keep your Foreman inventory up to date thanks to the foreman.py callback.

> It is also an elegant way to populate (import) unmanaged hosts to your Foreman instance. If you use the installer and install

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is an elegant way to populate (import) unmanaged hosts to your Foreman instance. If you use the foreman-installer and install
```

Reviewer 2: Can you import as managed hosts? And this is just a learning question, can you perform REX against unmanaged hosts?

Author: Yes, you can import as managed and unmanaged from compute resource. However managed hosts are then usually invalid, since they miss a lot of required information. The code simply skips all validations during import (sigh).

And yes, REX can be ran against both. In fact most of hosts that Katello deals with are unamanged (registered through sub-man). But you can apply errata on them through REX. Wait for a third blog post for more information about REX on unmanaged hosts :-)

> [foreman_ansible plugin](https://theforeman.org/plugins/foreman_ansible/), the callback is deployed for any Ansible run

Reviewer: I recently worked with Adam Ruzicka to create an updated Ansible manual https://docs.theforeman.org/master/Configuring_Ansible/index-foreman.html maybe we can add a link to here?

triggered from Foreman.

> However we'll look at how to configure the callback manually into your existing Ansible directory. That way, if you run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, we'll look at how to configure the callback manually into your existing Ansible directory. That way, if you run
```

any Ansible playbook, Ansible will upload facts and report to your Foreman. If one or more hosts that the Ansible run
included does not exist in your Foreman instance, it will be created. If it exists, it will be updated based on the facts

> gathered during the Ansible run. You still need the foreman_ansible to be installed to your Foreman, so it can properly import and process Ansible facts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gathered during the Ansible run. You still need the foreman_ansible plugin to be installed to your Foreman, so it can properly import and process Ansible facts.
```

Reviewer 2: Maybe add a link here to the foreman_ansible install guide?

EDIT: I see you discuss that down below.

> Ideally you deploy the Smart Proxy with Ansible feature to the host from which you run Ansible but it's not necessary

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ideally you deploy a Smart Proxy with Ansible feature to the host from which you run Ansible but it's not necessary
```

Might consider Ansible language here? Something like `to the host that serves as the Ansible control node`

and we'll not rely on this. Just keep that in mind in case you decide to start using the foreman_ansible plugin for running the Ansible.

> Start by installing the foreman_ansible plugin. To do that, run the installer like this

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Start by installing the foreman_ansible plugin. To do that, run the foreman-installer like this:
```

```
foreman-installer --enable-foreman-plugin-ansible
```

> Don’t worry if you ran installer with other arguments before, they are stored and automatically added to the next installer run. If you plan to use Ansible with Foreman further, it is a good idea to also install Smart Proxy plugin and CLI plugin, to do so, run

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Don’t worry if you ran installer with other arguments before, they are stored and automatically added to the next installer run. If you plan to use Ansible with Foreman further, we recommended installing the Smart Proxy plugin and CLI plugin, to do so, run
```

```
foreman-installer --enable-foreman-plugin-ansible \
                  --enable-foreman-proxy-plugin-ansible \
                  --enable-foreman-cli-ansible
```

Then proceed to the Ansible configuration. First of all, you need to download the callback. It lives in the [Foreman Ansible Module](https://galaxy.ansible.com/theforeman/foreman)
collection.

> Just run the following command  on the machine on which you normally run `ansible-playbook` on.

Reviewer 2: Having read part way down, I find myself asking should this be some server I already have that is outside Foreman's knowledge or is this my Foreman host or is this an external Smart Proxy. I can see value in doing two things here:

 1) Pushing a recommended, easy happy path (green field approach)
 2) Calling out the brown field approach where you already have some Ansible setup, and you want to start populating Foreman (should we recommend enrolling the control node in Foreman to make certificates easier? or installing a smart proxy?)

Author: this was meant for the brown field case, I added clarification for both cases though

   "msg": "You should see tony-sloane.example.com in the Foreman"
}

PLAY RECAP ********************************************************************
mqtt.example.com           : ok=2    changed=0    unreachable=0    failed=0    skipped=0
                             rescued=0    ignored=0    
tony-sloane.example.com    : ok=2    changed=0    unreachable=0    failed=0    skipped=0
                             rescued=0    ignored=0
```

Navigate to *Hosts -> All Hosts* and check that you see hosts and some more data about them.

<p float='left' align='center'>
  <img src="/static/images/blog_images/2021-01-12-updating-foreman-inventory-with-system-facts/hosts_list.png" width="700" />
</p>

*Please note that if you make a typo in the hostname (or the host is misconfigured in your Ansible inventory),
the callback still sends the report for the host, even if Ansible couldn't connect to it. That will result in
host record in Foreman database. The host will indicate a configuration error and will contain no facts.*

*Also if you see `The 'requests' python module is not installed.` error in the output, make sure to install the python-requests package.*

> ### Configuring the Puppet server

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Configuring a Puppet Server
```

You can deploy a callback script to your existing Puppet server that will forward Puppet facts to Foreman.
For more details about this, please refer to [the Foreman manual](https://theforeman.org/manuals/latest/index.html#3.5.5FactsandtheENC). The default Foreman installation (at least as of 2.3) deployed that together with the open source Puppet server so any puppet agent run results in facts being sent to Foreman.

> ### Configuring the Chef

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Configuring Chef
```

> There is a chef handler for chef-client to forward facts information through the Smart Proxy to Foreman itself. The key difference is, it needs to be installed on every machine running a chef-client.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is a chef handler for chef-client to forward facts through the Smart Proxy to Foreman itself. The key difference is that the handler needs to be installed on every machine running a chef-client.
```

The instructions for configuration can be found in the [handler repository](https://github.com/theforeman/chef-handler-foreman).
The main difference is, facts are gathered and formatted directly on the chef-client. Given the huge amount of facts chef
provides by default, it's common (and recommended) to define a filter on every chef-client by using a whitelist.

> ### Configuring the Salt stack

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Configuring SaltStack
```

Foreman Salt plugin also comes with the similar functionality, please take a look at [the manual](https://theforeman.org/plugins/foreman
_salt/13.0/index.html#2.1.2SaltMasterConfiguration)

## The fruit

Besides that your inventory gets automatically uploaded, there are some other benefits. You notice that OS objects are automatically created and associated with the Hosts. Also Hardware Models, Architectures, Puppet Environments are populated based on what is found in your infrastructure.

> If you visit *Hosts -> All Hosts* page, you will see a nice overview. Clicking the host name takes you to the Host detail page. You can see additional information we parsed out of facts, e.g. the IP, MAC, boot time etc. The IP and MAC addresses displayed in the Properties table are addressed by what the fact source considers a primary interface. The NICs tab lists all the network interfaces we received information about.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you visit *Hosts -> All Hosts* page, you will see a nice overview. Clicking the host name takes you to the Host detail page. You can see additional information Foreman parsed out of facts, e.g. the IP, MAC, boot time etc. The IP and MAC addresses displayed in the Properties table are addressed by what the fact source considers a primary interface. The NICs tab lists all the network interfaces we received information about.
```

<p float='left' align='center'>
  <img src="/static/images/blog_images/2021-01-12-updating-foreman-inventory-with-system-facts/host_details.png" width="700" />
</p>

> Clicking the Facts button in the Details section takes you to the list of all facts for the host. These are the raw values we keep for the host. For example, to find out the python version on your server, try searching for `host = host.example.com and name = ansible_python::version_info`. Similarly, you can search for your kernel version. If you want to see what all python versions you’re running in your infrastructure, click the View Chart button for the specific fact. You can also search for all hosts that run a specific, e.g. a vulnerable version. Click on the chart to filter the hosts represented by the color. The filter field above the table is updated accordingly, so you see an example of how to search for the hosts without using the charts. Searching is only limited by the data you import for your infrastructure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Clicking the Facts button in the Details section takes you to the list of all facts for the host. These are the raw values Foreman keeps for the host. For example, to find out the python version on your server, try searching for `host = host.example.com and name = ansible_python::version_info`. Similarly, you can search for your kernel version. If you want to see what all python versions you’re running in your infrastructure, click the View Chart button for the specific fact. You can also search for all hosts that run a specific, e.g. a vulnerable version. Click on the chart to filter the hosts represented by the color. The filter field above the table is updated accordingly, so you see an example of how to search for the hosts without using the charts. Searching is only limited by the data you import for your infrastructure.
```

<p float='left' align='center'>
  <img src="/static/images/blog_images/2021-01-12-updating-foreman-inventory-with-system-facts/python_version.png" width="700" />
</p>

> The name of the fact differs per fact source, remember, these are the raw values. Some of the facts are processed and unified. You can search hosts by these attributes on the All Hosts page. See the suggestions when you click the filter field. Searching capabilities deserve its own post. For now, please refer to [our manual](https://theforeman.org/manuals/2.3/index.html#4.1.5Searching).

Reviewer 2: Do we have a master list of normalized facts anywhere?

Author: just in the code https://github.com/theforeman/foreman/blob/develop/app/models/host_facets/reported_data_facet.rb#L6-L10

> Since you now have the inventory populated, let’s briefly take a look at *Monitor -> Report Templates*. These are the reports you can render from your Foreman. Writing your own template may be covered in some other blog post, however if you’re interested, you can find more information [in our manual](https://theforeman.org/manuals/2.3/index.html#4.11Reports).  

Reviewer 2: Could be good to add a section identifier above this as reports are really nice to call out.
